


ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



NAME
     ls - list contents of directory

SYNOPSIS
     /usr/bin/ls [ -aAbcCdfFgilLmnopqrRstux1 ] [ _f_i_l_e...  ]
     /usr/xpg4/bin/ls [ -aAbcCdfFgilLmnopqrRstux1 ] [ _f_i_l_e...  ]

AVAILABILITY
  /usr/bin/ls
     SUNWcsu

  /usr/xpg4/bin/ls
     SUNWxcu4

DESCRIPTION
     For each _f_i_l_e that is a directory, ls lists the contents  of
     the  directory;  for  each _f_i_l_e that is an ordinary file, ls
     repeats its name and any other information  requested.   The
     output  is  sorted alphabetically by default.  When no argu-
     ment is  given,  the  current  directory  is  listed.   When
     several  arguments are given, the arguments are first sorted
     appropriately, but file arguments appear before  directories
     and their contents.

     There are three major listing formats.  The  default  format
     for  output  directed  to  a  terminal  is multi-column with
     entries sorted down the columns.  The -1 option allows  sin-
     gle  column  output and -m enables stream output format.  In
     order to determine output formats for the -C, -x,  and   - m
     options, ls uses an environment variable, COLUMNS, to deter-
     mine the number of character positions available on one out-
     put  line.   If  this  variable  is not set, the terminfo(4)
     database is used to determine the number of  columns,  based
     on the environment variable TERM. If this information cannot
     be obtained, 80 columns are assumed.

     The mode printed under the -l option consists of ten charac-
     ters.  The first character may be one of the following:

          d   the entry is a directory;
          l   the entry is a symbolic link;
          b   the entry is a block special file;
          c   the entry is a character special file;
          p   the entry is a fifo (or "named pipe") special file;
          -    the entry is an ordinary file;
          |   the entry is a FIFO.

     The next 9 characters are interpreted as three sets of three
     bits each.  The first set refers to the owner's permissions;
     the next to permissions of others in the user-group  of  the
     file;  and  the  last  to  all others.  Within each set, the
     three characters indicate permission to read, to write,  and



SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    1






ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



     to  execute  the  file  as  a  program, respectively.  For a
     directory, ``execute'' permission  is  interpreted  to  mean
     permission  to  search  the  directory for a specified file.
     The character after permissions is ACL indication.   A  plus
     sign  is  displayed  if  there is an ACL associated with the
     file.  Nothing is displayed if there are just permissions.

     ls -l (the long list) prints its output as follows:

          -rwxrwxrwx+  1 smith  dev    10876  May 16 9:42 part2

     Reading from right to left, you see that the current  direc-
     tory  holds one file, named part2.  Next, the last time that
     file's contents were modified was 9:42 A.M. on May 16.   The
     file contains 10,876 characters, or bytes.  The owner of the
     file, or the user, belongs to the group dev  (perhaps  indi-
     cating ``development''), and his or her login name is smith.
     The number, in this case 1, indicates the number of links to
     file  part2;  see cp(1).  The plus sign indicates that there
     is an ACL associated with the file.  Finally, the  dash  and
     letters  tell  you that user, group, and others have permis-
     sions to read, write, and execute part2.

     The execute (x) symbol here occupies the third  position  of
     the  three-character  sequence.   A  - in the third position
     would have indicated a denial of execution permissions.

     The permissions are indicated as follows:

          r   the file is readable
          w   the file is writable
          x   the file is executable
          -    the indicated permission is _n_o_t granted
  /usr/bin/ls
          l   mandatory locking occurs during  access  (the  set-
              group-ID  bit  is on and the group execution bit is
              off)
  /usr/xpg4/bin/ls
          L   mandatory locking occurs during  access  (the  set-
              group-ID  bit  is on and the group execution bit is
              off)
          s   the set-user-ID or set-group-ID bit is on, and  the
              corresponding  user  or group execution bit is also
              on
          S   undefined bit-state (the set-user-ID bit is on  and
              the user execution bit is off)
          t   the 1000 (octal) bit, or sticky  bit,  is  on  (see
              chmod(1)), and execution is on
          T   the 1000 bit is turned on,  and  execution  is  off
              (undefined bit-state)





SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    2






ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



     For user and group permissions, the third position is  some-
     times occupied by a character other than x or -.  s also may
     occupy this position, referring to the state of  the  set-ID
     bit,  whether  it be the user's or the group's.  The ability
     to assume the same ID as the user during execution  is,  for
     example,  used  during login when you begin as root but need
     to assume the identity of the user you login as.

     In the case of the sequence  of  group  permissions,  l  may
     occupy  the  third position.  l refers to mandatory file and
     record locking.  This permission describes a file's  ability
     to  allow other files to lock its reading or writing permis-
     sions during access.

     For others permissions, the third position may  be  occupied
     by  t  or T.  These refer to the state of the sticky bit and
     execution permissions.

OPTIONS
     -a    List all entries, including those that  begin  with  a
          dot (.), which are normally not listed.

     -A    List all entries, including those that  begin  with  a
          dot  (.),  with  the exception of the working directory
          (.)  and the parent directory (..).

     -b    Force printing of non-printable characters  to  be  in
          the octal \_d_d_d notation.

     -c    Use time of last  modification  of  the  i-node  (file
          created,  mode  changed, and so forth) for sorting (-t)
          or printing (-l or -n).

     -C    Multi-column  output  with  entries  sorted  down  the
          columns.  This is the default output format.

     -d    If an argument is a directory, list only its name (not
          its  contents); often used with -l to get the status of
          a directory.

     -f    Force each argument to be interpreted as  a  directory
          and  list  the  name  found  in each slot.  This option
          turns off -l, -t, -s, and -r, and turns  on   - a;  the
          order  is  the  order  in  which  entries appear in the
          directory.

     -F    Put a slash (/) after each filename if the file  is  a
          directory,  an  asterisk  (*) if the file is an execut-
          able, and an at-sign (@) if  the  file  is  a  symbolic
          link.

     -g    The same as -l, except that the owner is not printed.



SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    3






ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



     -i    For each file, print the i-node number  in  the  first
          column of the report.

     -l    List in long  format,  giving  mode,  ACL  indication,
          number  of links, owner, group, size in bytes, and time
          of last modification for each file (see above).  If the
          file is a special file, the size field instead contains
          the major and minor device numbers. If the time of last
          modification  is  greater  than  six  months ago, it is
          shown in the format `month date year';  files  modified
          within  six months show `month date time.'  If the file
          is a symbolic link, the filename is printed followed by
          "->" and the path name of the referenced file.

     -L    If an argument is a symbolic link, list  the  file  or
          directory  the  link  references  rather  than the link
          itself.

     -m    Stream output format;  files  are  listed  across  the
          page, separated by commas.

     -n    The same as - l,  except  that  the  owner's  UID  and
          group's  GID numbers are printed, rather than the asso-
          ciated character strings.

     -o    The same as -l, except that the group is not printed.

     -p    Put a slash (/) after each filename if the file  is  a
          directory.

     -q    Force printing of  non-printable  characters  in  file
          names as the character question mark (?).

     -r    Reverse the order of sort to get reverse alphabetic or
          oldest first as appropriate.

     -R    Recursively list subdirectories encountered.

     -s    Give size in blocks, including  indirect  blocks,  for
          each entry.

     -t    Sort by time stamp (latest first) instead of by  name.
          The default is the last modification time.  (See -u and
          -c.)

     -u    Use time of last access instead of  last  modification
          for sorting (with the -t option) or printing (with the
          -l option).

     -x    Multi-column output with entries sorted across  rather
          than down the page.




SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    4






ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



     -1    Print one entry per line of output.

     Specifying more than one of the  options  in  the  following
     mutually exclusive pairs is not considered an error:  -C and
     -1 (one), -c and -u.  The last option specified in each pair
     determines the output format.

  /usr/bin/ls
     Specifying more than one of the  options  in  the  following
     mutually exclusive pairs is not considered an error:  -C and
     -l (ell), -m and -l (ell), -x and -l (ell).  The - l  option
     overrides the other option specified in each pair.

  /usr/xpg4/bin/ls
     Specifying more than one of the  options  in  the  following
     mutually exclusive pairs is not considered an error:  -C and
     -l (ell), -m and -l (ell), -x and -l (ell).  The last option
     specified in each pair determines the output format.

OPERANDS
     The following operand is supported:

     _f_i_l_e           A path name of a file to be written.  If  the
                    file  specified  is  not  found, a diagnostic
                    message will be output on standard error.

EXAMPLES
     An example of a file's permissions is:

          -rwxr--r--

     This describes a file that is readable, writable,  and  exe-
     cutable by the user and readable by the group and others.

     Another example of a file's permissions is:

          -rwsr-xr-x

     This describes a file that is readable, writable,  and  exe-
     cutable  by  the  user, readable and executable by the group
     and others, and allows its user-ID  to  be  assumed,  during
     execution, by the user presently executing it.

     Another example of a file's permissions is:

          -rw-rwl---

     This describes a file that is readable and writable only  by
     the user and the group and can be locked during access.






SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    5






ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



     An example of a command line:

          example% ls -a

     This command prints the names of all files  in  the  current
     directory,  including those that begin with a dot (.), which
     normally do not print.

     Another example of a command line:

          example% ls -aisn

     This command provides information on  all  files,  including
     those  that  begin  with  a dot (a), the i-number-the memory
     address of the i-node associated with the file - printed  in
     the left-hand column (i); the size (in blocks) of the files,
     printed in the column to the right  of  the  i-numbers  (s);
     finally,  the  report is displayed in the numeric version of
     the long list, printing the UID (instead of user  name)  and
     GID  (instead  of  group  name)  numbers associated with the
     files.

     When the sizes of the files in a  directory  are  listed,  a
     total   count  of  blocks,  including  indirect  blocks,  is
     printed.

ENVIRONMENT
     See environ(5) for descriptions of the following environment
     variables  that  affect  the  execution  of ls:  LC_COLLATE,
     LC_CTYPE, LC_TIME, LC_MESSAGES, NLSPATH, and TZ.

     COLUMNS        Determine the user's preferred  column  posi-
                    tion  width  for writing multiple text-column
                    output.  If this variable contains  a  string
                    representing  a decimal integer, the ls util-
                    ity  calculates  how  many  path  name   text
                    columns  to write (see -C) based on the width
                    provided.  If COLUMNS is not set or  invalid,
                    80 is used.  The column width chosen to write
                    the names of files  in  any  given  directory
                    will  be  constant.   File  names will not be
                    truncated to  fit  into  the  multiple  text-
                    column output.

EXIT STATUS
     0   All information was written successfully.

     >0  An error occurred.

FILES
     /etc/group                         group IDs for ls - l  and
                                        ls -g



SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    6






ls(1)                     User Commands                     ls(1)



     /etc/passwd                        user IDs for ls -l and ls
                                        -o
     /usr/share/lib/terminfo/?/*        terminal      information
                                        database

SEE ALSO
     chmod(1), cp(1), setfacl(1), terminfo(4), environ(5)

NOTES
     Unprintable characters in file names may confuse the  colum-
     nar output options.

     The total block count will be incorrect if if there are hard
     links among the files.









































SunOS 5.5.1         Last change: 17 Apr 1995                    7



